<p class="lede">I first read Guy Gavriel Kay’s <cite><a href="http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0060733497/ref=as_li_tl?ie=UTF8&amp;camp=1789&amp;creative=390957&amp;creativeASIN=0060733497&amp;linkCode=as2&amp;tag=81idea-20&amp;linkId=UWIYE5FQ4WYG3X2N">The Lions of Al-Rassan</a></cite> as a teenager. I knew, even then, that this was a novel I would not easily forget. Indeed, the passage of time has borne that out quite well. When I visited Madrid and Granada earlier this month, it was Kay’s <cite>The Lions of Al-Rassan</cite> rather than any other novel about Spain that I took with me to read on my solitary sojourn. </p>

In <cite>The Lions of Al-Rassan</cite>, Kay crafts a fictional world inspired by al-Andalus and the Spanish Reconquista, one poised on the brink of its own reconquest. When we begin the novel, the Asharite (Kay’s Muslim analogues) Khalifate of Al-Rassan, which had conquered the lands once known as Esperaña from the Jaddites (Kay’s Christian analogues) three hundred years ago, has fallen and splintered into a patchwork of city-states ruled by petty kings. Far to the north, the three Jaddite kingdoms of Valledo, Jalona and Ruenda, carved from what was once the Kingdom of Esperaña and divided among the sons and brother of the late King Sancho, are beginning to see an opportunity to reclaim their lost lands. Among the city-states of Al-Rassan, the Kindath (Kay’s Jewish analogues) live as second class citizens paying the heretics tax,<sup><a href="#fn01" id="fref01">1</a></sup> always aware that in times of crisis they will be the first to be persecuted by Asharites or Jaddites. And last, but not least, across the straits, in the Majriti, the Muwardis—who follow a stricter, more ascetic version of the Asharite religion—await their moment to come to Al-Rassan as saviors and purifiers. 

Into this charged environment Kay places his protagonists, the accomplished Kindath doctor Jehane, the Asharite poet, soldier and diplomat Ammar ibn Khairan, and the Jaddite military leader Rodrigo Belmonte. The novel traces the paths of these characters—and others—as they navigate a world that is becoming increasingly polarized between two religious extremes. As war between the Jaddite kingdoms and the city-states of Al-Rassan becomes inevitable, the fragile, limited space where once men (and some, exceptional, women) of different faiths and cultures could meet and—improbably—become the deepest of friends is torn asunder.

Indeed, if there is a 

<cite>The Lions of Al-Rassan</cite> inspired in me a desire to see its real world antecedents: the Alhambra of the Nasrid Sultans in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada, the tomb of Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar (known as El Cid or El Campeador) in the Cathedral of Burgos, and the Mosque-Cathedral of Córdoba. I did not see all of these places this time; I suspect it will take a few more trips to Spain to cover everything that I want to see. Yet, I did complete the pilgrimage I promised myself I would take, all those years ago. I saw the Alhambra, which undoubtedly was the inspiration for Kay’s Al-Fontina. 

<div class="footnotes">
    <hr class="w-50" />
    <ol>
        <li id="fn01">The real world antecedent for this was the <em>jizya</em> tax paid by non-Muslims (known as <em>dhimmi</em>) living under the protection of an Islamic state. <a href="#fref01">&#8593;</a></li>
    </ol>
</div>